Memory Management in Java
https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E13150_01/jrockit_jvm/jrockit/geninfo/diagnos/garbage_collect.html

Memory management is process of allocating new objects and removing old objects to make space for new objects allocation.

Heap and Nursery
Java objects reside in an area called the heap. Heap is created when the JVM starts and may increase or decrease in size while the
application runs.
When the heap is full, garbage is collected. During garbage collection, objects that are no longer needed are removed to make space for
new ones.

NOTE: JVM uses more memory that just heap. For example, Java methods, thread stack and native handlers are allocated in memory other
than
the heap as well as JVM internal data structures.

Two areas of heap:
Young generation(space)/ nursery: part of the heap reserved for allocation of new objects. When this area is full, garbage collection

performed by running a special young collection. Young collection moves objects that have lived long enough are moved to the old space,
thus freeing up nursery space for new object allocation.
The reason behind nursery is most objects are temporary and short-lived.
A young collection is designed to be swift at finding newly allocated objects that are still alive and moving them away from the
nursery.
A young collection frees memory much faster than an old collection or a single generational heap(heap without nursery).
Keep area - In R27.2.0 and later releases, nursery has an area called keep area. This contains most recently allocated objects and is
not
garbage collected. This prevents objects from being promoted just because they were allocated right before garbage collection.

Old space: contains objects that are still in use. When old space is full, garbage is collected by a process called old collection.

Object allocation:
During object allocation, the Jockit JVM distinguishes between small and large objects.
The limit for when an object is considered to be large depends on the JVM version, heap size, garbage collection stategy and the
platform, but it is usually between 2 and 128 kB
- Small objects are allocated in the Thread Local Area(TLA). TLA is a chunk of free memory taken from the heap given to a thread for
  exclusive use. The thread can allocate objects in this area without synchronizing with other threads. When the TLA is full, the
  thread requests new TLA. TLAs are reserved from the nursery if it exists else they are reserved from anywhere in the heap.
  
  Large objects that don’t fit inside a TLA are allocated directly on the heap. When a nursery is used, the large objects are allocated
  directly in old space. Allocation of large objects requires more synchronization between the Java threads, although the JRockit JVM
  uses a system of caches of free chunks of different sizes to reduce the need for synchronization and improve the allocation speed.

Garbage collection
It is the process of freeing up space in the heap or nursery for allocation of new objects.

Mark and sweep model:
- Used by JRockit JVM for garbage collection of whole heap.
- Two phases: Mark phase and sweep phase
- Mark phase: In this phase, all the objects that are reachable from Java threads, native handlers and other root sources, as well as
  the objects reachable from these objects are so on, are marked as alive. It marks all the objects in use and the rest is considered
  as garbage.
- Sweep phase: In this phase, the heap is traversed and the gaps between live objects are recorded in a free list and made availabe
  for new object allocation.
  
  Types:
  Mostly concurrent Mark and sweep: Allows threads to continue running during large portions of garbage collection. Threads do stop for
  synchronization few times.
  Four parts of mostly concurrent mark phase:
  - Initial marking: when the root set of live objects is identified. Done when threads are paused.
  - concurrent marking: where the references from the root objects are followed to find and mark the rest of the live objects in the
    heap. Done when the threads are running.
  - precleaning: where changes in the heap during concurrent marking phase are identified and any additional objects live are
    found and marked. Done whlie the threads are running.
  - final marking: where changes during the precleaning are identified and any additional live objects are found and marked. This is
    done while Java threads are paused.
  Four parts of mostly concurrent sweep phase:
  - sweeping of one half of the heap. This is done while the threads are running and are allowed to allocate objects in the area that
    is not being currently swept.
  - a short pause to switch halves.
  - sweeping of the other half of the heap. This is done while threads are still running and are allowed to allocate objects in the
    area of the heap that was first swept.
  - a short pause for synchronization and recording statistics.
  
  Parallel Mark and Sweep:
  The parallel mark and sweep strategy (also called the parallel garbage collector) uses all available CPUs in the system for
  performing the garbage collection as fast as possible. All Java threads are paused during the entire parallel garbage collection.

Generational Garbage Collection
When the nursery exists, it is garbage collected by a process known as young collection. A garbage collection stategy which uses
nursery is called a generational garbage collection strategy or generational garbage collection.
The young collector in JRockit JVM identifies and promotes all live objects outside the keep area to old space. This is done in
paralled using all available CPUs. All threads are paused during young collection.

Dynamic and static garbage collection strategies
Dynamic:
- throughput: optimizes garbage collector for maximum application throughput. This is the default mode.
- pausetime: optimizes garbage collector for short times and pause times.
- deterministic: optimizes the garbage collector for very short and deterministic pause times. Available only as part of Oracle JRockit
  Real Time.

Static:
- singlepar: it is a single generational paralled garbage collector (same as parallel).
- genpar: two-generational parallel garbage collector.
- singlecon: single-generational mostly concurrent garbage collector.
- gencon: two-generational mostly concurrent garbage collector.
